- then go over the entire available commands, ensure the logic exists in core, and wrapped in api, then utilized in cli for frontend usage. this requires an extensive amount of rework, and an extensive amount of changes. plan accordingly and ensure to run the verification twice, where the second time, YOU DO NOT ASSUME, you VALIDATE AGAIN to ensure nothing is missed. If there is conflicting logics in core and api, be sure to create a section so that a human manually chooses which logic to be picked
- `mvm kernel fetch` requires understanding if a kernel needs a build or it's pre-built, lets add a field in assets/kernels.yaml for each kernel to identify if compiling required, perhaps `compile` field if true, then compiling is required, otherwise no build and directly the binary is the kernel
    - the previous requirement is necessary since in cli/configure.py there is _build_default_kernel which hard-codes the kerne name, and not enough identifier if a kernel requires compiling or not.
- in cli/vm.py at line 239, the image extension is hard-coded. it must pull from metadata of the exact file system of the image being used for the vm.
- The entire codebase must use utility helper functions to get directories such as keys_dir, bin_dir, images_dir, kernels_dir, vms_dir, networks_dir, host_dir, logs_dir, ssh_dir (user's ssh folder at ~/.ssh) all of these must be a utilit helper function and being used across the entire codebase! There might be a possibility of a lot of changes, but it's imperative that this is only changed and it's not going to break behavior, tests must pass. One example of this issue is in cli/vm.py at line 474, there must be a utility helper function to get keys directory.
- in core/binary_manager.py the fetch_binary function hard codes both the tgz and sha256 url then constructs the file name. This full url is already defined in assets/defaults.yaml file, but the file name is not, so similar with templating, the filename with templated version and arch is defined in assets/defaults.yaml file, and then the fetch_binary function will format the template to correctly pass both arch and version from user
    - the `mvm bin fetch 1.15.0` should take arch flag which default is x86_64 so that we can use it in the url, use can also download a different architecture firecracker!
- the disable_snapd_cmd in defaults.yaml file must be a generic cloud-init command taking multi-line shell script, perhaps rename it to shell_exec
- the keys under vm.boot in the assets/defaults.yaml are duplicate, there is already `vm_defaults.boot_args` which has all in a single string separated by a space. this is better.
- the rootfs_filename in defaults.yaml should not have the file system extension! it must be identified via the image metadata.
- the network_guest has mac_default in defaults.yaml file, there shouldnt be a default mac! only mac prefix then randomly generated mac for everything. NO FALLBACK!
- you must create a helper function to get asset files such as the `firecracker.template.json` or any other file under assets folder`
- there are two functions to do auto network ip allocation one is _auto_allocate_subnet and the other is allocate_network_ip functions in core/network_manager.py, keep the most accurate one that allocates the IP based on the given network name, where given network name has its own cidr defined in the network state metadata.
- remove legacy metadata migration helpers and their tests to keep pre-production logic clean.
- in core/config_gen.py at line 200, the `rootfstype=` is hardcoding ext4, it must use the image's file system getting it fromi image metadata file!
- when running `mvm image fetch` and specify an image in assets/images.yaml, if the sha value for both sha256 and sha256_url are null, then do not warn or say checksum is missing! proceed and it's intentional!
- rename `yaml_id` in the metadata file to internal_id`
- same behavior as `mvm kernel fetch` IF in assets/kernels.yaml file, the sha value for both sha256 and sha256_url are null, then proeed! do not fail downloading!!!
- there is a critical behavior in assets/kernels.yaml for type `firecracker`, the source is the base url of where to download, and then you have the list url that puts the version to search for, then the code must list out given version in the url, and it responds with an XML template with <Key>firecracker-ci/{ci_version}/{arch}/vmlinux-{version}.155</Key>. notice the end patch version which is why we are doing the list in the first place, to always pull the latest major.minor version of the kernel. This only applies to firecracker kernel type. IMPLEMENT THIS CLEANLY
- Another critical behavior is that in `assets/kernels.yaml` when config_fragments are provided, they can look up the path in the assets directory or a remote file with support for arch and ci_version, and version passed to any provided config_fragments. a local file can be `kernel-firecracker-{ci_version}.config` or `kernel-base.config` and a remote url is `https://raw.githubusercontent.com/firecracker-microvm/firecracker/main/resources/guest_configs/microvm-kernel-ci-{arch}-6.1.config`. you do not parse the config, we are already doing it in build-kernel.sh file where download the config to the official kernel directory, then run `make olddefconfig` then apply other config to enable/disable as as we do in build-kernel.sh file!
